Data Modeling with PostreSQL-

Introduction-
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

Project Description-
In this project, I have applied what I've learned on data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. To complete the project, I have defined fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

Datasets Given as below-

1.Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

2.Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

Database Schema Design-

Here, we are using star Schema. sonplays table is a fact table and users, songs, artists, and time tables are the dimension table in This star Schema.

Reason of using Relation Database for this scenario-

1. The given datasets are structured.Hence we know the structure of the json file before hand which we need to anlayze and where and how to extract and transform the field.

2. Here we required JOINS.

3. The datasets is not that big. Which means tha datasets given is a small datasets.

4. Data which is needed to fulfill the business scenario can be modeled using simple ERD models.

Fact Table-
songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

Dimension Tables-
users - users in the app
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
songs - songs in music database
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
artists - artists in music database
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


Project Template-
Files used in this project:
1. data folder at the location of home of the project consist all the provided datasets.
2. test.ipynb displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.
3. create_tables.py drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
4. etl.ipynb reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
5. etl.py reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.
6. sql_queries.py contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.
7. README.md provides discussion on my project

Project Steps
Below are steps that I have followed to complete the project:

Create Tables
- Write CREATE statements in sql_queries.py to create each table.
- Write DROP statements in sql_queries.py to drop each table if it exists.
- Run create_tables.py to create your database and tables.
- Run test.ipynb to confirm the creation of your tables with the correct columns. Make sure to click "Restart kernel" to close the connection to the database after running this notebook.

Build ETL Processes:
Followed the instructions in the etl.ipynb notebook to develop ETL processes for each table. At the end of each table section, or at the end of the notebook, run test.ipynb to confirm that records were successfully inserted into each table. Remember to rerun create_tables.py to reset your tables before each time you run this notebook.

Build ETL Pipeline
Used what I've completed in etl.ipynb to complete etl.py, where I'll process the entire datasets. Remember to run create_tables.py before running etl.py to reset your tables. Run test.ipynb to confirm your records were successfully inserted into each table.

NOTE: You will not be able to run test.ipynb, etl.ipynb, or etl.py until you have run create_tables.py at least once to create the sparkifydb database, which these other files connect to.


